[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to 'Beyond Belief."
You know, there are
a number of topics
we deal with on
this program that
are so compelling, so riveting.
This subject you're
going to hear today
is probably one of the
most compelling of all.
Dr. Eben Alexander with
us, author of "Proof
of Heaven," a neurosurgeon.
And something happened to that
neurosurgeon some time ago.
Eben, welcome to the program.
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: Well,
George, thanks for having me.
It's great to be back here.
>>NOORY: What happened to you?
>>ALEXANDER: Well
you know, it all
started with 54
years of life working
as an academic neurosurgeon,
thinking I understood
brain, mind, and consciousness.
And then 4:30 in the
morning, November 10, 2008,
I suddenly became very ill
with a rapidly progressive
gram-negative bacterial
meningoencephalitis that
took over my brain
within a few hours,
drove me into a state of
seizures, deep into coma.
And then I was admitted
to a hospital where
I had worked as a neurosurgeon,
and I spent seven days
in that coma.
My doctors basically thought
I had a 10% chance of survival
early in the week, down to
2% by the end of the week,
with no chance of recovery.
And that's when I started
coming back to this world.
Had an extraordinary
experience that
by all of current neuroscience
would be completely impossible
because of the damage
to the human part
of my brain, my neocortex.
And yet, it did happen.
And that has been the
basis of this mystery
I've been trying to unravel
for the last nine years.
>>NOORY: When this
happened to you,
were there any signs
that you were sick?
Or it was just--
[SNAPS FINGERS]
--like that?
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
my family and I
had been trading some viral
symptoms for a few days,
so I thought early that morning
that maybe this virus had
really taken off in me.
But other than that, there
was really no warning at all.
And it was so extreme, pain
that I just cannot describe.
Severe back pain,
severe headache,
and then a rapid
descent into deep coma.
So it really was an
extraordinary illness
that, in fact, to me,
one of the biggest shocks
when I came back from it all
was reviewing my medical records
and realizing, this guy couldn't
have had any experience,
and certainly couldn't have
survived and come back intact.
And yet, that's what happened.
Over eight weeks
after my coma, I
had a full recovery
of my mental functions
to a point where
my memories were
even better and more complete
than they had been before coma.
And that part was
a complete shock.
>>NOORY: Do you think
going to the other side may
have helped you heal yourself?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I'm convinced
that that's absolutely right.
I would say that all
of our human existence
is simply a process of
becoming more whole.
That's where the word
healing comes from,
is becoming more whole.
And in essence, I've
come as a physician
to realize that any physical,
mental, emotional health is
first and foremost
spiritual health.
And that's why I think
near-death experiences provide
such a rich kind of example of
the power of spiritual health
and healing.
You find very miraculous
cases of healing
with no explanation
in Western medicine
are sprinkled widely
through the NDE literature.
There are many cases out there.
To me, that is one of the
biggest lessons of NDEs
is an ability to gain far more
complete control of our health
and healing, and realizing
as spiritual beings
in a spiritual universe
that that kind of power
and learning the lessons
is part of our growth
and becoming more whole.
>>NOORY: There was an artist
who went to the other side
and came back as well.
It's an example, of course,
of what happened to you.
>>NARRATOR: In 1982, artist
Mellen-Thomas Benedict
died of terminal cancer.
While he was traveling
toward the light,
Benedict decided he had
questions and wanted
to see things first.
In an amazing
near-death experience,
he recalled flying
through the solar system,
leaving this galaxy and
traveling to other worlds that
had other life.
His journey reportedly
took him to far-off worlds
and even passed the Big Bang
into the void of nothingness.
Benedict awoke an hour and a
half later after he had died.
Later tests showed
that his cancer
had gone into what the doctors
called spontaneous remission.
>>NOORY: Again, somebody goes to
the other side and comes back,
and his cancer is in remission.
>>ALEXANDER: Right.
>>NOORY: It's amazing.
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
these kind of stories
are all through
the NDE literature.
Whether you look at Anita
Moorjani's beautiful story
"Dying To Be Me" and her
lymphoma that in her NDE
she realized she could come back
and the cancer would disappear,
and that's what happened.
Mary C. Neal's story,
the orthopedic surgeon
who wrote her book about her
kayaking accident in Chile
where she was underwater
for 30 minutes.
>>NOORY: Flipped right over.
>>ALEXANDER: Right.
And people don't
come back from that
to return to a normal
life, and yet she did.
So these miraculous cases
of healing, I think,
are one of the most
extraordinary lessons that
come out of the NDE literature.
And certainly as a
health care person,
I'm fascinated by the
clues that they give us
about how we can all take
control of our own healing,
and as spiritual
beings, come to realize
that we can have tremendous
mastery over our destiny.
And that starts first and
foremost with our health.
>>NOORY: When you went to the
other side, what was it like?
Describe it for us.
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
it all started
in a very primitive,
coarse, unresponsive realm
that I call the
earthworm's eye view.
A very dark and murky
kind of coarse reality,
like being in dirty Jell-O.
>>NOORY: Ew.
Sounds like Hell.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, people
often ask me when I--
>>NOORY: Not that
you would go there.
>>ALEXANDER: No,
well-- but it is
part of the spiritual realms.
And it's something we
have no need to fear,
but that fearlessness
is a crucial part
of the lesson of my journey.
Turns out that
from that realm, I
was rescued by a slowly
spinning white light, very clear
that came bundled with a
perfect musical melody.
And that white light
opened up, like,
a rip in the fabric of that
ugly earthworm eye view realm
and led up into an
ultareal valley, what
I call the gateway
valley, that was filled
with many Earth-like features.
For example, there was lots
of plant life, lush, growing.
Flowers blossoming,
buds on trees.
No sign of any death or decay.
Beautiful waterfalls
in the sparkling pools,
thousands of beings dancing
below, tremendous joy
and merriment.
I saw them all as
souls between lives.
And I was witnessing it
all as a speck of awareness
on a butterfly wing.
There were millions
of other butterflies--
>>NOORY: Outside looking in?
>>ALEXANDER: Looking
down on this valley.
And again, the
thing to stress, it
was absolutely-- it was far
more real than this world.
This world is the dream.
This is the murky
kind of surreality.
That is the shocking reality
of our spiritual realm.
And it was all very much
fueled because up above
in the sky over this
beautiful valley
were these swooping orbs
of light, golden orbs
leaving sparkling
trails of golden dust
against the blue-black
velvety sky.
And these orbs were emanating
chants and anthems, hymns
that would thunder through me.
This incredible, astonishing
power and majesty
of the unconditional love
of the deity of that realm,
that God that drove every
bit of that journey.
And of course, there was a
beautiful girl on the butterfly
wing who later proved
crucial at showing me
the reality of the journey.
Many months after my coma,
it was identifying her
that helped me to
understand it all.
But that was only
a stepping stone
to higher and higher levels.
And in fact, those angelic
choirs, the music from them
provided yet another portal.
Music, vibration,
frequency are the way
that our souls
transcend these realms.
And that particular
portal out of the valley
led into pure oneness, in
what I call the core realm.
Infinite inky
blackness, but filled
to overflowing with
the healing power
of that divine loving creative
source, that God or deity.
In fact, I came back
calling that deity Om,
because that was the sound
that I heard in that realm.
But it was just an
extraordinary spiritual journey.
And the most amazing
thing, of course,
is that it happened when my
brain was demonstrably offline,
when the neocortex was
known by my neurologic exams
and by my scans.
My doctors knew that
I could not have
had any kind of
robust experience,
because this was far more
real than anything I've ever
experienced in my existence.
>>NOORY: A skeptic
would say, this
is a process of your brain.
It's creating these
illusions and these images
while you're in this state.
What would you say to them?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, that's
why my doctors were
in such a good position
to say, absolutely not.
And any doctor who has ever
seen a case of gram-negative
bacterial meningitis where
someone is driven into coma
over three and a half hours,
spends seven days in coma
and then comes back from
it, even though my brain was
absolutely savaged
when I came back--
I mean, an important
thing to point out
is that my NDE was somewhat
different from others
in the fact that I had no
memory of Eben Alexander's life.
I was amnesic for everything
on my religious beliefs, words
and language, all my
scientific knowledge.
Every bit of that was deleted
before I went into this coma.
So when I came
back to this world,
all that I knew that
Sunday morning on day seven
when they extubated me
and I started to come back
to this world, all I knew was
the realms I had just visited.
I didn't even recognize
my mother, my sons,
my sisters at the bedside.
I had no idea who
these beings were.
And all of that
came back quickly,
words and language
over hours and days,
childhood memories
over weeks, all
of my semantic knowledge
of science and physics,
and all personal life memories.
Every bit of that returned
over about eight weeks.
And that was what
was so extraordinary.
It showed me very clearly
that memories are not
stored in the physical brain
at all, which is probably
one of the biggest nails in the
coffin of materialist science.
>>NOORY: Like on the
cloud somewhere, and then
they bring it back into you.
>>ALEXANDER: Exactly.
Our brain serves to access
consciousness and access
memory, but it is not the
repository or generator,
producer of all that.
And the modern
scientific view that
is replacing that old
useless production
model of brain-producing
consciousness
is what is called
filter theory, where
consciousness is primordial.
The entire universe emerges
out of consciousness itself,
who some might call God or
that creative source or deity.
But in fact, I would say it
is so deeply personal to each
of us that our very
conscious awareness is
identical with that
creative force of oneness
and consciousness that
creates all of reality.
>>NOORY: How common are
near-death experiences?
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
they're extremely common.
Probably 15 million or so at
least in the United States
over the last few decades.
There was a Gallup poll back
in the early '80s in the United
States that indicated that
roughly 15% of our population
has had a near-death experience.
Now it turns out those
numbers are probably
expanding, because
back in those days,
people were not very
likely to report one.
You generally-- I mean, you--
>>NOORY: And they probably
didn't know what they were.
They didn't know what they were.
And in fact, they
thought they were crazy.
That's what I thought
when I came back.
I thought, well, this was some
example of the insanity of what
a dying brain can do.
That's what my doctors told me.
And yet when you went back
through the medical records
and realized what
was going on, you
realized, well,
that brain could not
have accomplished any kind
of dream, hallucination, drug
effect.
That brain was far too impaired
with neocortical damage
to have come up
with anything other
than the most rudimentary
forms of consciousness.
And yet, I witnessed the
exact opposite of that.
I would say we are conscious
in spite of our brain.
Our brain acts much more as
a reducing valve or filter.
It's an inhibitor.
That's why, for example,
psychedelic drugs can
have such a robust kind of
expansion on our awareness,
is they take down some of the
gating mechanisms and veiling
functions and inhibitory
actions of the brain,
and allow a more
full-frontal exposure
to that universal mind.
But from my point of view, the
best way to really access it
is through meditation.
And I try to encourage people
not to use psychedelic drugs,
although I realize they're
important for the research
and for sacred purposes.
And also for example,
psilocybin has
been shown in recent
studies to be extremely
effective at combating
nicotine addiction, alcoholism,
other addictions, but
also the fear of death
in cancer patients.
Psilocybin, a potent
psychedelic drug,
has tremendous utility in
helping us to deal with things.
But in essence, it's
kind of getting us
more in touch with
our spiritual self
and that spiritual healing.
And from my point
of view, we can
be far more effective at driving
that through meditation alone
and not using
substances to get there.
>>NOORY: Would you say when
you were in this state, Eben,
that you were in
a state of bliss?
>>ALEXANDER: It was far
beyond the word bliss.
I mean, this is becoming
the love, the oneness,
the complete connectedness
and compassion of all.
It's the richest, deepest
form of universal love.
And it's something we all
kind of sense and glimpse.
And yet, unfortunately
in our world,
love is so often
attached to conditions.
You know, I will love you
if, or do this otherwise.
And yet, unconditional love is
what has such tremendous power
to heal.
That's why forgiveness is
one of the most potent tools
a human being has.
Forgiveness frees the
forgiver from the shackles
of the prison of
any kind of conflict
that requires forgiveness.
And it's much more
an acknowledgement
that we are all
part of one mind.
We really are the one mind
dreaming this beautiful dream.
And we're all
different facets of it,
but it's like different
facets of a diamond,
and we're all that diamond.
To even say we're part
of it is misleading.
That's how our language
conspires to give us
a false sense of separation.
But in fact, what
quantum physics has
been trying to show us,
what this revolution
in understanding the mind and
the nature of consciousness
is trying to show us,
is that we are all one.
And therefore, to hurt
another is to hurt myself.
This is one of the
most beautiful lessons
that comes, for example,
through the life review of NDEs.
The life review occurs
in 30% to 50% of NDEs
and is a very powerful
illustration of the fact
that we really are all one.
Because in the life review, when
you listen to people tell them,
it turns out that they're
witnessing their thoughts
and actions on others from the
point of view of the other.
So the boundary of self
disappears in the life review,
and it shows you we are
all part of that one mind.
The other important
thing, of course,
is it shows us that Earth
time, the progression past,
present, future that we think
is so written into reality
is all part of the maya.
It's part of the
appearance of the world,
but it's not part of
the underlying reality.
And life reviews show us that
very quickly and clearly,
because you can have a
profound life review that
involves everything
in your life, all
the important goods and bads
of lessons still to be learned.
And yet, it can happen--
[SNAPS FINGERS]
--like that.
>>NOORY: Did this
experience erase all doubt
about the existence
of the other side?
>>ALEXANDER: Yes.
Absolutely.
It showed the fundamental
reality of the other side.
And I think this
whole awakening,
coming to the scientific,
philosophical, theological,
and to the broad human community
is one of really coming
to see that and recognize
that, that we are truly
spiritual beings in
a spiritual universe.
The material world,
which has been
the focus of 400 years of
scientific investigation,
is a beautiful stage setting
on which the drama unfolds.
But the plot and theme are very
much part of a soul journey
that are not mired down in
any kind of chemical reactions
in the brain, and
things like that.
It's a far richer journey.
And it points out
very easily how
you can realize why our
current conventional scientific
paradigm is so completely
lost over the phenomenon
of consciousness.
And this is something that
we go into in great detail
in our next book, "Living
in a Mindful Universe,"
that talks about all of this.
And it's a shift in perspective.
But I would say
there's no way out
for the scientific community
other than admitting this.
That's why quantum physics
has presented such a conundrum
to modern science.
And as long as they continue
to insist that consciousness
is not real, they're
going to continue circling
the drain of confusion.
But as you realize
that consciousness
is the fundamental
reality, and it
is what generates everything
else, all of the material
world, including our
body and brain, which
are part of the material world
projected from consciousness,
as we start to shift
that perspective
and take on that new
way of looking at it,
it starts to make
far more sense.
>>NOORY: Our mutual
friend, Dr. Brian Weiss,
an expert in this field as
well, had an opportunity
to regress one of his
patients and found out
some startling things.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>OPRAH WINFREY: Back
in 1980, Dr. Brian Weiss
was using hypnotherapy
with a patient named
Catherine to discover the roots
of her paralyzing phobias.
In his book "Many
Lives, Many Masters,"
he writes that during
one of their sessions,
Catherine regressed back to
a time before she was born,
recounting a past life as
an 18-year-old girl named
Aronda from the year 1863 BC.
Sounds crazy, I know.
So OK.
You are a Yale-trained,
Columbia-trained doctor,
psychiatrist, agnostic.
And this woman is
saying these things.
Things are coming
out of her mouth that
are literally unbelievable.
What did you make of that?
I mean, so she finishes
her hour session.
I mean, I would have let
her go two hours that day
if I were you.
[LAUGHTER]
She finishes her session,
and you say what?
>>BRIAN WEISS: I said, I
don't know what this is,
but I could already see it
was intense, it was cathartic,
it was emotional.
And I didn't know why--
>>WINFREY: Because
when you're hypnotized,
you remember everything
you're saying.
>>WEISS: Yes.
Yeah.
It's not something
that you forget.
You remember it.
>>WINFREY: So she probably
couldn't believe it herself.
>>WEISS: For her, it
was easier than for me--
>>WINFREY: To believe it.
>>WEISS: --because it was
so-- yeah, to believe it.
It was so intense for her.
She was experiencing it
with emotions and visually
and in sounds and other
senses that it became easier
over the weeks that followed
for her to change her worldview.
But for me, I needed more,
because I was such a skeptic,
so left-brained, so academic.
And I started already
explaining it away.
>>NOORY: Oprah seemed kind
of baffled or in shock
about this experience.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, she did.
And you know, I admire
Brian Weiss's courage
in coming out with that.
I know what that kind
of thing is like.
I mean, for me, it took an
extremely life-threatening case
of bacterial meningitis
and a week in coma
to start to turn around
my belief system.
>>NOORY: Wouldn't
it have been better
for you to have done it through
patients rather than yourself?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I guess.
But you know, patients
had tried to tell me.
As I point out in "Proof
of Heaven," I just--
I was too dense.
I just couldn't get it.
>>NOORY: You didn't get it.
>>ALEXANDER: I kind
of explained it away.
And that's been the problem
with our modern science.
In fact, I'd say it's
one of the biggest
problems with reductive
materialism, which
is our kind of conventional
view of science.
You know, reduce all
of the physical world
down to its tiniest
little particles,
figure out how they work, and
then you understand reality.
From my point of view, that's
going the wrong direction.
That's the bottom-up
approach that
can't begin to explain
the richness of all
of human experience.
We need more of a top-down view.
And that, of course,
is what I think
Dr. Brian Weiss was
coming to realize,
what I've come to realize.
And it has everything
to do with just
expanding our field of view.
We have to step outside of
this mind-body relationship,
of brain and mind and
their kind of interactions
to start to glimpse
exactly how it all works.
And that is where
meditation comes in
so handy, because I
believe in meditation
we actually transcend that veil.
And by coming more in touch
with the universal mind,
universal consciousness,
we can start to glimpse
how the little details
of apparent parcellation
occur down in this
world in human lives.
>>NOORY: With what's going
on in this entire realm
of reincarnation, past lives,
and it's all interconnected,
it's all tied together, did you
have that kind of experience
as well?
Do you believe you've
had past lives?
>>ALEXANDER: I am
certain of that.
In fact, my sons have
shared with me some evidence
of their past lives.
And I know that there's
a great reality to that.
Now before my coma, if you had
asked me about reincarnation,
I would have scoffed and kind
of chuckled at your ignorance.
>>NOORY: And examined
me for some problem.
>>ALEXANDER: Exactly.
We've got to scan you, figure
out where that tumor is.
But it turns out that
the scientific basis
for reincarnation
is quite strong.
If you look at the
works of Ian Stevenson
at the University of Virginia,
his work currently being
carried out by Dr.
Jim Tucker, division
and perceptual studies,
they've done extraordinary work
and have more than 2,500
cases of past life memories
in children collected over the
last four or five decades where
the most ready explanation
is actually of reincarnation.
To me, reincarnation was
absolutely essential to explain
anything of my journey.
For example, it was
the only way to make
sense of the infinite
healing power, omnipotence,
and omniscience of
that deity, of that God
that I witnessed with the
suffering of innocents
like children and animals.
To try and make sense of
that with one incarnation
made zero sense.
It only made sense to
see the bigger pattern,
that our souls come
back again and again
in this rich, interwoven
tapestry of soul journey,
of soul learning.
And this is really soul school.
And I kind of often
would picture us
like schools of flying fish.
And we come up and
out of the water
and go through our life reviews
and do it with our higher soul,
realize that power of
love, and then dive back
into the water to live
other incarnations
where there's a
program forgetting.
There's a reason we
don't remember everything
from between lives
and past lives,
and that has to do with
the ongoing learning.
It gets a skin in the game
to believe that we only
have this one incarnation
to live these lives,
to feel the power of love
and the power of loss,
and to really live that and
have that rich exposure.
But that's all
part of what drives
the soul school and
this learning and deeper
understanding.
>>NOORY: Are you
scared of dying, Eben?
>>ALEXANDER: No.
Now I'm in no hurry to die.
I really--
>>NOORY: There's no rush.
There's no rush.
>>ALEXANDER: But I
realize it's an adventure.
I also know that when you
die, it's not a case--
what I would have told
you before my coma is
that as the brain
flickers out, so
does your conscious awareness.
In fact, what happens is
your conscious awareness
expands tremendously.
Because once again,
your awareness
is liberated from the shackles
of the physical brain that
have to maintain this kind of
illusion of our incarnation
in these physical bodies.
But that's how we grow.
That's how all of soul grows.
That's how this mind
dreams in its progression.
I like to say, it's often
like Teilhard de Chardin
in his beautiful
mid-20th century
book, "The Phenomenon
of the Man,"
talking about the
evolution of consciousness.
That's what I would say
this is really all about,
is all of consciousness
is evolving.
It's not just human
consciousness.
This is consciousness
throughout the universe.
And it is what generates
all of reality.
And that's what we
are all part of.
But it does not--
we do not accomplish any of
those goals in one incarnation.
We come back repeatedly.
And for me, kind
of a litmus test
of how far advanced a
soul is in that process
is how much they've
liberated themselves
from the false notion of self.
The more free they
are of the ego,
the more they realize
we're all in this
together, that it's all about
love, compassion, mercy,
forgiveness, and taking
care of each other, that
is the deep soul lesson
that humanity has
been charged with learning
for the last many thousands
of years.
And we still haven't
quite learned it.
I think we're on the cusp
of some major learning.
>>NOORY: I had a friend
who passed away recently.
He had been paraplegic for
seven years after falling.
He had stenosis of
the spinal cord,
and then he fell
and hit his neck,
and he was just a paraplegic.
He couldn't move
his arms and legs.
And so for seven years, he
was confined to a wheelchair,
pushing his buttons
with his little fingers.
But he finally passed on.
At that moment of
death, Eben, I've
always wondered, what
is that crossover like?
I mean, so he's alive and
alert, and then he dies.
Then what?
How does it pick up, and how
soon with our kind of time
does it pick up again?
>>ALEXANDER: I would
say a perfect example
of what happens there are the
last words of Steven Jobs.
Many people think Apple
computer was his--
>>NOORY: "Oh wow."
>>ALEXANDER: "Wow
oh wow oh wow."
Because what he was
seeing-- and those words
I've heard in various forms
from hundreds of people
describing similar situations.
But it happens right away.
There are what are called
episodes of terminal lucidity.
I mention terminal lucidity
in the book "Proof of Heaven."
These are examples
where someone who
has been getting progressively
demented over time,
they may have spent weeks
or months unable to utter
a meaningful phrase at all.
But then as they
get close to death,
they come right back to life.
And this can even
happen in people
whose brains have been
completely overtaken
by metastatic cancer.
It's a clear example
of how the brain is not
the producer of
consciousness at all.
But terminal lucidity-- and
hospice workers know this
phenomenon very well--
is a beautiful
gift that shows us
that that transition
is very powerful,
and it happens when
we leave this world.
And it actually starts
when we're still
kind of with one
foot in this world
and one foot in that world.
And it's a beautiful gift.
Michael Nahm, N-A-H-M, wrote
a fantastic book on terminal
lucidity with, I
believe, 83 cases.
And they're just extraordinary.
And I've encountered several
of those examples myself.
But they show us clearly
that we are spiritual beings,
that the brain is
more of a prison,
and that that awakening
that profound enlightenment
comes to all of us as we leave
our physical bodies behind.
>>NOORY: Well, that
helps explain really
an argument of without
the physical brain,
does any of this exist?
And based on your experience
and Brian Weiss's and so many
other people, the brain
is not the catalyst
for what's happening afterward.
>>ALEXANDER: Right.
The brain is like a transceiver.
It's like the radio.
I sometimes use
the analogy, it's
kind of like the
computer display.
So yes, you can
do a lot of things
to understand the workings
of the computer display,
and that helps you
to understand what
you're seeing with your eyes.
But if you really
want to understand
what is being displayed, you
have to go beyond that monitor.
You have to go deep within
the workings of the CPU.
And that is transcending
the physical universe
and going into where
really it all happens,
which is the spiritual realm.
As I said earlier,
time flow, all
of the kind of
physical workings,
this is like the facade
in a Western movie being
filmed by Hollywood.
And you can understand
the laws of physics, which
are the laws of that facade.
But if you really want to
understand the workings of what
happens in human lives, and
kind of why, for example,
placebo effect, why we have
such power over our health,
why incredible synchronicities
can come into our lives, things
that have absolutely
no explanation
from a conventional
scientific viewpoint,
and yet they occur in our lives
with this profound lesson,
realize that there are
higher-ordering principles.
And that has to do
with our understanding
and our spiritual nature,
the spiritual nature
of this entire universe,
and why we are here.
So it's a beautiful gift to
start to take this bigger
picture into our lives.
>>NOORY: One of my favorite
news people, ABC'S Bob Woodruff
had his own
near-death experience.
>>DIANE SAWYER: It is
the eternal question.
What happens after we die?
ABC's Bob Woodruff,
you may know,
had his own
near-death experience
five and a half years
ago when he was injured
by a roadside bomb in Iraq.
And he decided to talk
to some people who
think they know the
answer to the question.
>>BOB WOODRUFF: What I saw
that day while unconscious
is seared in my memory.
My own body floating
below me; a light,
painless and comfortable,
engulfing me.
I wanted to meet others who
had seen the same like Mary Jo
Rapini.
>>MARY JO RAPINI: All of a
sudden, it just came over me,
and I was--
I was in it.
I was in that light.
>>WOODRUFF: A few years
ago, Mary Jo almost
died while lifting
weights at the gym.
She felt a pop in
the back of the neck.
A blood vessel in her
brain had suddenly burst.
>>RAPINI: I entered this room.
God held me.
And I never saw God's
face, but I felt him.
The first thing he said
was, you can't stay.
>>WOODRUFF: Were you
ever above your body?
Or did you see yourself
at all in any of this?
>>RAPINI: Well, I--
when I was going up,
I knew my body was back there.
Like, I caught a glimpse of it.
I wasn't afraid at all.
>>WOODRUFF: Yeah.
I mean, I saw mine.
I felt like I had
become a stranger.
You know, but at
this moment, I just--
for a small period of time, I
was watching myself below me.
And then I changed
direction and woke up again.
Scientists say there is
still no clear evidence
of what causes these visions.
Are they voyages?
Are they dreams?
>>ALEXANDER: These things
really get your attention,
and they can be
the most profound,
life-changing experience
anyone ever has.
And a general effect, of
course, is that people come away
realizing that death
is not to be feared,
that it's a transition
to a much higher level.
And I think that is one
of the biggest gifts.
But of course, there are
tremendous other gifts.
I would say that near-death
experiences in many ways
are the tip of the
spear in the awakening
of the modern
scientific community
to the incredible repertoire
of the mind-brain relationship,
and how our deeper understanding
of that and of the very nature
of consciousness leads us
into tremendous territory
in our understanding of
the nature of reality
that has been hamstrung
for hundreds of years
by the materialist
scientific effort
to try and prove that
the physical world is
the only thing that exists.
And of course, the
reason for that
is that was the focus of
their work over centuries.
And early on, if
they strayed too far
into the world of
consciousness and mind,
they were getting into the
territory of the church
and they risked getting
burned at the stake.
And I believe that's
a huge reason why
they fought so hard to keep
consciousness and mind out
of the picture.
And yet, quantum
physics forces us
to bring mind and consciousness
right back into the picture.
Not only that, but to
put it front and center
as the determinant of what
evolves in this universe
and at the very fundament
of all of a human's
perception of reality.
>>NOORY: Eben, what has
this experience done to you
personally at this point?
How has it changed you?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I would
say it's changed everything.
It really--
>>NOORY: It's a game changer.
>>ALEXANDER: It is a
complete game changer.
And I had to start over
really at square one
when I came back from my coma.
Now of course, initially,
I just believed
what my doctors told me,
that the dying brain can
play all kinds of tricks.
And I tried to
dismiss it as that
and then explain it
from my medical records
as a predictable effect of
destroying the neocortex.
And yet the more I
did that, the more I
realized the lessons were
there that were very profound,
and demanded that I could
no longer just put Band-Aid
on an old broken worldview
of scientific materialism,
that I had to really go
back to the very fundaments
of everything I believed.
This is really about
our metaphysics.
The metaphysics is kind of
the underlying assumptions
about the nature of reality.
Like a metaphysical
idea would be
that the world is
comprehensible,
or that all of the world
is just a physical,
that there is nothing more.
So I had to really go down
and question all those beliefs
at a very fundamental level.
And it's completely changed
my kind of understanding
of interrelationships with
people, about the very nature
of illness and of injury,
of why we have these things.
And I came back seeing that
the hardships and challenges
in life, the difficulties
of illness, injury, these
are gifts.
These are what drive our soul
lesson and our understanding.
And it's by how we address
these challenges that we
can come to grow spiritually.
That's why, for example, I would
say that as we talked earlier
about the healing
power that often comes
with very profound spiritual
near-death experiences that
completely defies Western
medical explanation is part
of the package.
But we all have access to that.
And it's by opening
our minds and having
that much broader view
of why we're here,
facing up to those
hardships and difficulties--
why am I encountering this
meningitis or this terminal
diagnosis or a child
who committed suicide?
These very tough things that
happen to people I believe
are there for a reason.
>>NOORY: Not that you
weren't, but has it
made you a better person today?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, let's just
say that I am much more focused
on the good of all,
and that this is really
about taking care of
each other and really
trying to manifest that love,
that unconditional love.
I came to realize that most
of the world's problems
are because of the
fact that we don't even
love ourselves enough.
That's the real problem.
I might have told
you before coma,
well, the challenge is
loving your neighbor,
loving your enemy.
Well, in fact, that challenge is
loving yourself and recovering
that memory of self
as being connected
to the divine, an
infinitely loving source
at the core of this universe
that we are part of.
"Part of" is a bad
word, because you know,
that implies that
there's a separation.
But in fact, it is
truly that oneness.
And our language conspires,
because language,
as Rene Descartes said,
"to define is to limit."
Those limits are very confusing.
And it's only by realizing that
what quantum physics is trying
to tell us and what the hard
problem of consciousness
is trying to tell us is that we
are all part of that one mind.
And it's the one mind
dreaming this beautiful dream,
and we're all constituents
of that dream.
But we need to realize that
and take it into our worldview
that we are part
of that oneness,
and that it is all bound
together through love.
And another lesson
from my journey
is that this is not a battle
between good and evil,
the forces of light
and the forces of dark.
But that in fact, unconditional
love and that light
has infinite power to
overwhelm the darkness
and an apparent evil, because
the darkness and apparent evil
are only the lack of
the love and the light.
>>NOORY: You've talked
about meditation before
and how important it is to
the functions of our brain
and everything else.
Let's take a look.
>>ALEXANDER: Right
now, the pulsing sound
you are hearing
in the background
is gently helping your
brain to move into what is
known as the alpha frequency.
This will allow you to achieve
a more relaxed frame of mind.
To get the most out of this
sample track, close your eyes,
take some nice deep breaths,
and focus on that pulsing sound.
As we go within and realize
that the consciousness we're
encountering is not that
puny little version created
by the brain that
would have been part
of my old model of brain
produces consciousness,
but it's universal
consciousness.
It is the source
of all that comes
into existence in this world.
So meditation is a form
of transcending the veil.
It's another way of
coming to realize
that the thoughts in our head,
that little linguistic brain,
that voice--
and of course, that's
the voice of logic
and of rational, scientific
thought and all of that.
But that little
voice, especially
as it pertains to our
ego, is little more
than a parlor trick.
Consciousness is the observer.
That's what we can develop
in deep meditation is
that observer self.
Whether you're talking about the
hard problem of consciousness,
which is the impossibility
of anyone explaining
the physical brain as the
source of consciousness itself
or the measurement paradox
in quantum physics,
both of those at the
front edge of the mystery
of modern science take us
right into the observer.
And the observer or awareness
is the deep mystery.
And that's what we can
develop in meditation,
and that's why I'm such a big
proponent of the work that I
do with Sacred Acoustics
and using sound frequency.
And slight differences in
sound frequency presented
to the two ears intersect
in the lower brain
stem in a very
ancient circuit that
arose probably 200
million years ago
in evolutionary neurobiology.
And it's taking
that circuit that
then enables conscious
awareness to break free.
And this is something
that I was attracted
to beginning about two
years after my coma when
I came to realize that
slight differential sound
frequencies to the
two ears can have
a profound effect on
conscious awareness.
And that is really kind
of the magic behind
what are called binaural beats.
And the most
powerful form of them
comes from the group
Sacred Acoustics,
and I work very
closely with them
on some of the development
of those tones.
But it enables us to
really break free.
>>NOORY: What has your
near-death experience convinced
you of God?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, it has
convinced me completely of God.
I think what it
has done, though,
is changed kind of
how I see that God.
I see that God is far more
powerful now than anything
I thought of before, but also
deeply interconnected with each
and every one of us.
The very spark of
awareness, the very thing
that keeps us from being what is
known in philosophical circles
as a philosophical zombie--
that is, something that
looks and acts and quacks
just like a human being, but
has no inner mental experience.
The thing that keeps that from
being the case is exactly that,
is that deity, the
sanctity within us,
which is the creative force
of the entire universe.
So it's not to be diminished
as some little personal God.
This is far grander than that.
What it shows really is
that we are co-creators
of the universe as it evolves.
We co-create with
that infinite power,
that all-loving power of God.
And the more we can
align with that love,
with that oneness, with
we're all in this together
and that we need to
take care of each other,
the more aligned
we are with that,
the more we have escaped
those boundaries of self
that to me are an
indicator of very
early soul in this journey.
I was saying a little
while ago about kind
of that litmus test that shows
how far along a soul might
be in the journey through
multiple reincarnations
is the degree to which
they've freed themselves
from the notion of just being
a little self and an ego
with all of its petty
little interests.
Those souls are very
early on in the game,
whereas the more
advanced souls are
the ones who realize
we're all part of one mind
and that it's all about love.
>>NOORY: As we wrap this up,
Eben, this final question,
which is probably the most
perplexing of all of them,
how did this come to be?
How did we get to
where we are, where
we have this existence; we
have this life after death?
How did it happen?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I
think, again, I kind of
put this all down to being this
beautiful dream of discovery
of the one mind.
And the one mind
is living this out
through each and
every one of us,
this drama, this
beautiful kind of--
it's a progression, though.
It's a learning
teaching experience.
So it's not static.
And it's the evolution
of information.
I would also say it's not a
cold, mechanistic wheel that
might be part of some
theological systems.
It really is, from
my point of view,
very much aligned with the
way that Teilhard de Chardin
painted the picture in
"The Phenomenon of the Man"
back in the mid-20th
century, that this
is an evolution
of consciousness,
and we are all part
of that process.
And it's all about
learning and growing
and about manifesting that
love and sense of connectedness
with all that is.
And I would say that
it very likely--
I mean, the thing that was
clear to me in my journey
is that we are on the cusp
of really becoming part
of that far grander
cosmic community that
is rich throughout this
cosmos of this kind of growth.
And human beings to date have
this kind of limited mindset
that we're kind of the
pinnacle of evolution on Earth,
that we're the
main show in town.
And yet I believe that
much of this awakening
that I think is part of
human destiny over at least
the last 3,000
years or so is part
of joining a much bigger
club, and that that
is why all of this
awakening is happening now.
>>NOORY: I am glad you
have come back to tell us
about the other side.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, it's a
beautiful gift to share.
And what I can tell you
is that I get much more
from all of my fellow
journeyers out there than I
feel I give to this world.
Whenever I give
presentations, talk
with other souls
on this journey,
they give me far better
gifts than I feel I deliver.
So it's all a mutual
journey of discovery,
and where we're
all in it together.
And it's really
something that I think
is cause for great optimism.
>>NOORY: Eben, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>ALEXANDER: Well, George,
thank you so much for having me.
It's great to be back.
>>NOORY: A neurosurgeon
who died and had
that capability of
coming back to tell us
all what's on the other side.
As he said, we're in
no rush to get there.
But when it does
happen, at least
we'll have a better
understanding
that you don't
have to be scared.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]